15-822: System Design & Implementation Practicum

Spring 1999
M. Satyanarayanan

Information source:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/user/satya/Web/sdipracticum.html

Goal

Provide hands-on learning of skills relevant to the design, implementation, 
evaluation and tuning of complex systems. 

These skills cannot be acquired through lectures or independent readings. 
Further, their acquisition cannot be satisfactorily evaluated through 
conventional means such as written or oral examinations and homework 
assignments. 

Format

The course is project-based, with each student doing a different project. 
The projects share two unifying characteristics. 

First, there will be a substantial implementation component to each project, 
even though the relative balance between design, implementation, evaluation 
and tuning may vary from project to project. In some cases, the implementation 
may be of tools or instrumentation for evaluation of a system. Analysis or 
critique of a system by just studying its design or source code does not
meet these criteria. 

Second, the projects will be "real" rather than contrived. In other words, 
every project will address the needs of some "customer". A "customer" might 
be a CS or Robotics research project, SCS facilities, or a group outside SCS 
like ECE or INI. One can even conceive of projects in which the beneficiary is 
outside CMU, such as Fore or Transarc. 

The sponsor of a project (i.e., the "customer") is expected to contribute 
substantially toward the educational process by helping the student come up 
to speed on project-specific context and providing resources such as 
specialized equipment. Most importantly each sponsor will provide a mentor 
who will be generous with his time and to whom the student can turn to for 
advice and guidance. The mentor will also play a role in evaluating the 
student's work. 

To avoid conflicts of interest, a student cannot take a project sponsored by 
his advisor. 

Organization

Some time before the course begins, I will publicize it to potential sponsors 
and solicit projects. I will then select a subset of the projects based on a 
variety of factors such as their size and scope (to ensure they are not too 
large or too small), the likelihood that they will lead to effective learning, 
and the presence of effective and enthusiastic mentors. 

Students will be matched to projects at the beginning of the course. The 
matches will, of course, be customized: i.e., a student's particular level of 
skill and knowledge will be taken into account. A project that may be valuable 
to one student's learning may be not be useful in this respect to another 
student. 

Once students are assigned projects, most of the interaction will take place 
between mentors and students. My primary responsibility will be to oversee the 
process, not to micromanage it.  To ensure quality control and to detect 
problem situations early, I will meet with the class regularly. There will be 
a weekly class slot reserved (3:00 - 6:00 on Tuesdays for Spring 1999),
though actual class meetings may be less frequent. An important use of class 
time will be to obtain status reports of all the projects. 

Evaluation

Besides the actual project, a student must write a short report (5 to 8 pages) 
that describes the goal of the project, a brief description of the technical 
approach, and a candid assessment of how well the project turned out. Most 
importantly, the student should reflect on what new skills he learned or 
substantially enhanced, and what surprises he encountered. He should
also briefly describe what he would do differently if he were to repeat the 
project with the benefit of hindsight. 

At the end of the semester, the course will hold a poster session in which 
each student will present a poster describing his work and copies of his 
report. In addition, unless logistically difficult, each student will offer 
a demo of his work. All faculty and students will be encouraged to visit this 
poster session. The DRC, in particular, will visit the session to ensure 
quality control 

The grade a student receives will factor in a number of components: 

primarily, the quality of his project execution (with input from his mentor 
playing an important part in this assessment). 
secondarily, the quality of his report, poster and demo 

Credits

This course is for 12 units.  CS PhD students may take it as one of their 
electives. 

Enrollment

Note that enrollment in this course is limited to about a dozen students. 

Permission of the instructor is required to enroll --- send me mail or come by 
and talk to me so I can determine if this course is appropriate for you. 
